Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
Anukrati Shukla; Lorena I. Rasquin; Catherine Anastasopoulou.

Author Information and Affiliations
Last Update: July 7, 2025.

Go to:
Continuing Education Activity
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder among females of reproductive age worldwide. The pathophysiology of PCOS primarily involves insulin resistance and a high prevalence of visceral adiposity irrespective of obesity, which causes errors in hormonal cross-talk between the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and ovaries. PCOS is associated with multiple comorbidities, including infertility, metabolic syndrome, obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular risks, depression, obstructive sleep apnea, endometrial cancer, and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD).

PCOS is based on the presence of diagnostic criteria. This course explores the complexities surrounding PCOS, including the current diagnostic challenges and multifactorial pathophysiology, exploring the role of insulin resistance and hormonal abnormalities. Delayed diagnosis can contribute to complications, making timely lifestyle interventions crucial for symptom management and improving quality of life. Moreover, as a chronic metabolic disorder, PCOS requires a detailed and individualized approach to management, focusing on both reproductive and metabolic health. This activity for healthcare professionals is designed to enhance the learner's competence in identifying PCOS, performing the recommended evaluation, and implementing an appropriate interprofessional approach when managing this condition.

Objectives:

Identify the need for timely diagnosis of polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Screen patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome for comorbid conditions.
Implement appropriate management for patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Apply interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination and outcomes in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Access free multiple choice questions on this topic.
Go to:
Introduction
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine pathology in females of reproductive age worldwide. Stein and Leventhal initially described the problem in 1935. The prevalence ranges between 5% and 26% [1], depending on the diagnostic criteria applied. Basing the clinical diagnosis of PCOS on the presence of at least 2 of the following 3 criteria is widely accepted among specialty society guidelines: chronic anovulation, hyperandrogenism (clinical or biochemical), and polycystic ovaries. PCOS is a diagnosis of exclusion, and disorders that mimic the clinical features of PCOS must be excluded. Delays in diagnosis can lead to the progression of comorbidities, making it more difficult to implement lifestyle interventions, which are critical for the improvement of features of PCOS and quality of life.

Multiple comorbidities that are associated with PCOS include infertility, metabolic syndrome, obesity, impaired glucose tolerance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, depression, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), endometrial cancer, and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD).[2][3][4] Healthcare professionals need to be aware of the heterogeneity in prevalence across ethnicities, phenotypic presentations, and pathogenetic mechanisms. Despite being a lifelong chronic metabolic condition, the response to lifestyle changes and weight loss as low as 5% has been noted to be beneficial, with the resolution of clinical symptoms and improvement in fertility outcomes.

Go to:
Etiology
PCOS is a complex, multigenic disorder with strong epigenetic factors associated with it.[5] Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple PCOS-associated genetic loci; many of these genes are involved in various levels of insulin resistance, ovarian steroidogenesis, steroid hormone biosynthesis, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, adrenal cortisone reductase deficiency, and gonadotrophic dysregulation.[6] Twin studies have estimated that about 70% of PCOS pathogenesis is attributable to genetic components.[7] 

The DENND1A (Differentially Expressed in Normal and Neoplastic Development isoform A1) gene was identified as a potential risk marker.[8] Epigenetic factors like obesity affect the hypermethylation of granulosa cells in the ovary, inhibiting gene expression. Some hypotheses also include fetal androgen exposure as a potential etiology that requires validation.[9] The role of microRNAs in the regulation of GLUT4 implicated in insulin resistance has also been validated.[10][11]

Go to:
Epidemiology
As evidence is growing, PCOS is being recognized as the most common endocrine pathology in reproductive-aged females worldwide, affecting between 5% and 26% of females. Rotterdam criteria, the most common criteria used in prevalence studies, includes broader criteria than the second most commonly used, which is the National Institute of Health 1990 Criteria. The Revised Rotterdam Criteria by Androgen Excess Society (RCAES) is more sensitive in including PCOS phenotype with polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM) with infertility than the Rotterdam criteria. The degree of hirsutism was less in women diagnosed using NIH criteria when compared to those diagnosed with Rotterdam criteria and RCAES criteria. Those diagnosed with the Rotterdam criteria had a lower prevalence of insulin resistance than those diagnosed with the NIH and RCAES criteria.[12] Conversely, more than 80% of women who present with hyperandrogenism have PCOS.[13] Based on the NIH 2012 workshop report, PCOS is estimated to affect about 5 million reproductive-aged females in the United States. The cost to the healthcare system for diagnosing and treating PCOS is approximately 4 billion annually, not including the cost of severe comorbidities associated with PCOS.

Higher prevalence has been associated with first-degree relatives who also have a diagnosis of PCOS, prepubertal obesity, congenital virilizing disorders, above-average or low birth weight for gestational age, premature adrenarche, and the use of valproic acid as an antiepileptic drug. Studies have also suggested a higher prevalence of PCOS among Mexican Americans than among non-Hispanic whites and African Americans.[14][15] Geographical differences in the prevalence of components of diagnostic criteria worldwide, as well as the heterogeneity, must be considered.[1] There are changes in the phenotypic prevalence of PCOS, with women having classic PCOS (type A) decreasing over time to not meeting PCOS criteria in a 5-year long-term follow-up study.[16]

Go to:
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of PCOS is complex and multifactorial, with aberrancies in ovarian steroidogenesis, insulin resistance, antimullerian hormone (AMH), and Luteinizing hormone (LH) excess from dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis. These pathways interact in numerous ways and at various points along the pathogenic chain. However, most recent literature has increasingly recognized it as a metabolic disease.[17] The bidirectional link between hyperinsulinemia and androgen excess is an essential pathogenetic feature.[17] 

Etiologies for this dysregulation involve insulin resistance leading to hyperinsulinemia, which is seen in 70% of females with PCOS. Impaired catecholamine sensitivity to lipolysis has been demonstrated as an early indicator of insulin resistance.[18] Insulin is known to sensitize the ovary to LH by interfering with the process of homologous desensitization to LH in the normal ovulation cycle, as well as an intrinsic imbalance among intraovarian regulatory systems, whereas insulin-like growth factors (IGF) interact with FSH in granulosa cells, influencing follicular maturation and steroidogenesis.

Theca cells in PCOS exhibit overexpression of most steroidogenic enzymes and proteins involved in androgen synthesis, suggesting a prominent abnormality in the level and activity of steroidogenic enzymes, including P450c17, which has been highly identified. Granulosa cells prematurely luteinize primarily as a result of androgen and insulin excess. Additionally, hyperinsulinemia affects IGF-1 binding protein and SHBG in the liver, as well as the adrenal steroid response to hyperandrogenemia. A positive feedback loop between FSH and IGF-1 in granulosa cells is essential for follicular dominance and maturation.[19] Impaired IGF-1 levels in hyperinsulinemia states can also affect follicular maturation and lead to oligo-ovulation. On the other hand, androgen excess leads to impaired IGF-1 levels, potentiating the cycle.[20] Insulin resistance in PCOS is independent of adiposity.[21] Circulating C-reactive protein is elevated in individuals with PCOS, irrespective of obesity, compared to controls, indicating low-grade chronic inflammation.[22]

Two-thirds of PCOS presentations have typical functional ovarian hyperandrogenism (FOH), characterized by dysregulation of androgen secretion with an over-response of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) to gonadotropin stimulation. The remaining 20% to 30% of PCOS cases have an atypical FOH response of 17-OHP, but testosterone elevation can be detected after suppressing adrenal androgen production. About 3% of PCOS patients have a related isolated functional adrenal hyperandrogenism. Specific testing for the FOH subpopulation has low clinical utility in the present day.[23] Androgen excess enhances the initial recruitment of primordial follicles into the growth pool. Simultaneously, it initiates premature luteinization and impairs the dominant follicle selection. This results in classical PCOS histopathologic and gross anatomic changes constituting PCOM.

LH excess is common and is necessary for the expression of gonadal steroidogenic enzymes and sex hormone secretion, but is less likely to be the primary cause of ovarian androgen excess because of LH-induced desensitization of theca cells. Hyperandrogenemia provokes LH excess, which then acts on theca and luteinized granulosa, sustaining the cycle. Clinically, the waist-to-height ratio correlates strongly with hyperandrogenism compared to other anthropometric parameters.[24]

Ovarian hormonal dysregulation alters the pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone release, potentially leading to a relative increase in LH versus follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) biosynthesis and secretion. LH stimulates ovarian androgen production, while the relative decrease of FSH prevents adequate stimulation of aromatase activity within the granulosa cells, decreasing androgen conversion to the potent estrogen estradiol. This becomes a self-perpetuating, noncyclic hormonal pattern. Elevated serum androgens are converted in the periphery to estrogens, mostly estrone.

As conversion occurs primarily in the stromal cells of adipose tissue, estrogen production is augmented in obese PCOS patients. This conversion results in chronic feedback at the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, in contrast to the normal fluctuations in feedback observed in the presence of a growing follicle and rapidly changing estradiol levels. Unopposed estrogen stimulation of the endometrium may lead to endometrial hyperplasia.[25][26][27] Recently, additional pathways of autoimmune response and chronic inflammation have been identified in animal studies to play a pathogenic role in the follicular development defects of PCOS and fertility outcomes.[28] 

Go to:
Histopathology
Histological findings from rat models have shown that PCOS rats had multiple follicular cysts with degrading and thin granulosa layers.[29]

Go to:
History and Physical
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome Clinical Features

A complete clinical assessment is critical for the diagnosis of PCOS. Diagnosis comprises criteria of which 2 out of 3 consist of history and physical examination elements, including menstrual history, fertility history, obesity, and features of hyperandrogenism. Additionally, PCOS represents a diagnosis of exclusion; therefore, clinical presentation of other conditions should be recognized.

According to the 2023 International Evidence-Based PCOS Guidelines, irregular menstrual cycles are defined as follows:

Normal in the first year postmenarche as part of the pubertal transition.
Within 1 to <3 years postmenarche, menstrual cycle intervals <21 or >45 days 
Within 3 years postmenarche to perimenopause, menstrual cycle intervals <21 or >35 days, or <8 cycles per year
Any cycle 1 year postmenarche with an interval >90 days
Primary amenorrhea by age 15 or >3 years post thelarche (breast development) [30]
Hair loss patterns can vary widely, often appearing in a vertex, crown, or diffuse pattern. Women with more severe hyperandrogenism may experience bitemporal hair loss and a receding frontal hairline. Additionally, adolescents with severe or treatment-resistant acne, whether to oral or topical antibiotics, may have a 40% chance of developing PCOS. Clinicians should be particularly vigilant for underlying hyperandrogenism in females in their mid-20s to 30s who have persistent or worsening acne.[30]

Hirsutism is characterized by the presence of coarse, dark terminal hairs in a pattern typically associated with males. Signs of virilization, eg, increased muscle mass, reduced breast size, deepening of the voice, and clitoromegaly, are not commonly seen in PCOS. Virilization suggests elevated androgen levels, which warrants further investigation. In such cases, clinicians should be more concerned about the possibility of an androgen-producing tumor in either the ovary or the adrenal gland.[30]

On physical examination, hirsutism should be assessed objectively using the modified Ferriman-Gallwey scoring system.[31] Depending on ethnicity, a modified Ferriman-Gallwey score (mFG) of 4 to 6 should be used to detect hirsutism, acknowledging that self-treatment is common and can limit clinical assessment.[30]

Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome Risk Factors and Phenotypes

Risk factors like a family history of PCOS, fetal androgen exposure, and a family history of metabolic syndrome need to be taken into account. Though 38% to 88% of women with PCOS are either overweight or obese[32], women with PCOS tend to have more abdominal fat accumulation compared to body mass index (BMI)-matched controls.[33] Therefore, a normal BMI should not exclude a diagnosis of PCOS.

The Androgen Excess Society is also cautious that some PCOS patients may have a history of “regular menses” despite being oligo-ovulatory; patients who present with clinical evidence of hyperandrogenism but apparent eumenorrhea should have their ovulatory function evaluated further with progesterone levels.[30][34] The PCOS task force identified 7 phenotypes (A to G) based on hyperandrogenism, hirsutism, oligo-anovulation, and polycystic ovaries.[34] Phenotype A, or classic phenotype, presents evidence of all 4 criteria of hyperandrogenism, hirsutism, oligo/anovulation, and polycystic ovaries, being the most common. Phenotypes often improve with age, and a reduction in hyperandrogenism and an increase in FSH levels are frequently observed.[35]

Go to:
Evaluation
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome Diagnostic Criteria

Most society guidelines have accepted that PCOS may be diagnosed if 2 out of the 3 following clinical criteria are present: chronic oligo-anovulation, clinical or biological hyperandrogenism, and PCOM in the absence of any other pathology, which are part of the Rotterdam Criteria. The National Institute of Health criteria also require clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism and oligo or anovulation; however, the Rotterdam Criteria are the most commonly used.[30]

Newer criteria from the International Evidence-Based Guideline for the Assessment and Management of PCOS 2023 recommend that the diagnosis of PCOS in an adult woman requires the presence of 2 out of the following 3 criteria, as well as the exclusion of differential diagnoses with similar clinical features:

Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism
Ovulatory dysfunction
Findings of polycystic ovaries on ultrasound or elevated AMH levels [30]
When irregular menstrual cycles and hyperandrogenism are present, neither ultrasound nor AMH testing is necessary for the diagnosis of PCOS in adults. In adolescents, both hyperandrogenism and ovulatory dysfunction must be present for a diagnosis of PCOS. However, ultrasound and AMH testing are not recommended in this population due to their low specificity.[30] Additionally, chronic oligo-ovulation or anovulation may be established based on the history of irregular cycles. Notably, ovulatory dysfunction can still occur with regular cycles; therefore, if diagnostic confirmation of anovulation is needed, serum progesterone levels should be measured.[30]

Excluding disorders that can mimic the clinical features of PCOS is also essential, including thyroid disease, hyperprolactinemia, and atypical congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. For this last condition, a measurement of serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone is required, which may need to be followed by an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test.[36][37][38]

Hyperandrogenism Diagnostic Evaluation

Clinical hyperandrogenism is diagnosed in adult women who present with hirsutism, alopecia, and acne, which can serve as effective clinical indicators of biochemical hyperandrogenism. Healthcare professionals should assess biochemical hyperandrogenism in the diagnosis of PCOS by measuring total and free testosterone. Free testosterone can be estimated using the calculated free androgen index. If levels of testosterone or free testosterone are not elevated, clinicians may consider measuring androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS). However, clinicians should be aware that these markers have lower specificity, and DHEA levels tend to decrease with age.[30]

Laboratories should prioritize using liquid chromatography or mass spectrometry assays over direct immunoassays (eg, radiometric and enzyme-linked assays) for assessing total or free testosterone, as direct immunoassays have limited accuracy and exhibit poor sensitivity and precision for diagnosing hyperandrogenism in PCOS. If androgen levels are significantly above laboratory reference ranges, healthcare professionals should consider other causes of hyperandrogenemia, including ovarian and adrenal neoplasms, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing's syndrome, ovarian hyperthecosis (particularly after menopause), iatrogenic effects, and syndromes associated with severe insulin resistance. However, some androgen-secreting neoplasms may only cause mild to moderate increases in androgen levels. Therefore, taking a clinical history that includes the timing of symptom onset and any rapid progression of symptoms is crucial for evaluating the possibility of an androgen-secreting tumor.[30]

Imaging Findings of Polycystic Ovaries

Ovarian morphology assessment is more accurate when conducted using transvaginal ultrasound. The number of follicles per ovary (FNPO) is the most effective ultrasound marker for detecting polycystic ovary morphology (PCOM) in adults. In addition to FNPO, the number of follicles per cross-section (FNPS) and ovarian volume are also reliable ultrasound markers for PCOM in adults. An FNPO of ≥20 in at least 1 ovary should be considered the threshold for diagnosing PCOM in adults.[30]

For patients with irregular menstrual cycles and hyperandrogenism, an ovarian ultrasound is not necessary for diagnosing PCOS. Although measuring AMH can be useful for determining a PCOS diagnosis when an accurate ovarian ultrasound is unavailable to assess PCOM morphology, AMH alone cannot be used as a diagnostic tool for PCOS. Furthermore, AMH should not be used for diagnosis in adolescents.[30]

Go to:
Treatment / Management
Lifestyle Modification 

Lifestyle modifications are the primary and most effective management approach for PCOS treatment. Fertility is likely to return with a modest weight loss of about 5%, which can be achieved through a low-calorie diet that also improves ovarian structure.[39] Lifestyle interventions, eg, exercise alone or a combination of diet, exercise, and behavioral strategies, should be recommended for all women with PCOS to reduce their metabolic dysfunction. Improved metabolic health in these patients can be monitored by observing reductions in central body fat and normalization of the lipid profile.[30]

Pharmacologic Management

Hormonal contraceptives

The first-line treatment for women with symptomatic PCOS, specifically for issues such as menstrual irregularities, hirsutism, and acne, is a combined hormonal contraceptive. This can be administered as an oral contraceptive pill (OCP), patch, or vaginal ring. The Endocrine Society does not recommend one method over the others.[30]

The progestin component of these contraceptives helps to lower LH levels, which in turn reduces ovarian androgen production and increases levels of sex hormone-binding globulin. Furthermore, some progestins possess direct antiandrogenic properties, inhibiting the activity of 5 alpha-reductase, which prevents the conversion of free testosterone into its more potent form, 5 alpha-dihydrotestosterone. This makes combined hormonal contraceptives particularly effective in managing symptoms of hyperandrogenism and regulating the menstrual cycle.[30]

Identifying any contraindications to hormonal contraceptives in all patients being considered for this therapy is critical. Regarding metabolic effects, higher estrogen levels tend to increase high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and decrease low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. No significant difference in body weight or fat distribution between women with PCOS and those without has been demonstrated. When prescribing oral contraceptives, an initial dosing of 20 µg of ethinyl estradiol combined with a progestin that has antiandrogenic properties, eg, desogestrel or drospirenone, or one with neutral effects like norethindrone acetate, is recommended. Studies have shown that a combination of COC with low-dose spironolactone is more effective at reducing symptoms and biochemical markers of hyperandrogenism than using metformin alone.[40]

On the other hand, a combination of metformin and low-dose spironolactone has been found to be more effective in alleviating symptoms and improving medication compliance than either medication used separately.[41] Antiandrogens like spironolactone may be considered for treating hirsutism in women with PCOS if the response is insufficient after at least 6 months of using combined oral contraceptives or undergoing cosmetic treatments. Other antiandrogens, eg, cyproterone (at doses over 10 mg per day), finasteride, flutamide, and bicalutamide, carry potential risks of adverse effects and toxicities; therefore, caution should be exercised when using them.

Metformin 

As the understanding of PCOS shifts towards viewing it as a primarily metabolic disorder, metformin and other insulin-sensitizers and their therapeutic utility have taken center stage. Metformin also improves menstrual cycles, abnormal waist-to-hip ratio, and vascular markers in nonobese women with PCOS.[42] 

In adult women with PCOS, metformin may be less effective in improving hirsutism compared to OCPs in the subgroup with a BMI of 25 kg/m2 to 30 kg/m2. Metformin alone or OCP alone may be less effective in improving hirsutism than when metformin is combined with OCP. We are uncertain whether there is a difference between the OCP alone and metformin alone compared to metformin combined with the OCP for severe or minor adverse events, except for the OCP versus metformin combined with the OCP, where the OCP may decrease the incidence of minor or even severe gastrointestinal adverse events.

Further large, well-designed RCTs that stratify for BMI are needed to evaluate metformin versus OCPs and combinations in women with PCOS, in particular adolescent women. It can be used for menstrual irregularities in patients with a contraindication for hormonal contraceptives.[30] Metformin is commonly used in adolescent monotherapy to help restore regular menstrual cycles and aid in weight loss, as well as reduce insulin resistance. It can also mildly improve androgen excess symptoms.[43]

Infertility Treatment 

The first-line therapy for infertility in PCOS patients is letrozole. Clomiphene citrate combined with metformin could be used rather than clomiphene citrate alone in women with PCOS with anovulatory infertility and no other infertility factors to improve ovulation and clinical pregnancy rates.[30]

Symptom-based Treatment for Hirsutism, Alopecia, and Acne 

Clinical hyperandrogenism requires long-term treatment and takes several months before effects are evident. Cosmetic interventions should be initiated while medications start working. These can be bleaching and temporary hair removal methods, galvanic or blended electrolysis for localized areas with an experienced operator, or laser photo-epilation for generalized hirsutism. Pharmacological interventions include topical eflornithine for facial hirsutism, which can be an expensive treatment with potentially serious adverse effects if the body absorbs it.

The first-line treatment of hirsutism is low-dose neutral or antiandrogenic oral contraceptives, which effectively lower androgen levels and their effects. Additionally, contraceptive properties are beneficial when combined with antiandrogenic drugs because the latter require reliable contraception as they are highly teratogenic, and measures should be taken to avoid pregnancy while they are used. Mild hirsutism can be treated with OCP alone. Adjuvant antiandrogen administration can be considered for moderate and severe hirsutism and mild hirsutism without adequate hair growth control after 6 months to 1 year of OCP. 

Additional Insulin Sensitizing Treatment in PCOS

GLP-1 agonists 

Treatment with GLP-1 agonists has been associated with decreased BMI and testosterone and an improved ovulation rate in obese women with PCOS.[44] Increasing evidence shows that weight loss and insulin sensitivity are higher with GLP-1 agonists than with metformin.[45] GLP-1 has not yet been approved for the management of PCOS as an indication. A 2-year observational study on maintaining long-term weight loss after a 16-week treatment with semaglutide, followed by metformin continuation, showed net weight loss and a decrease in circulating testosterone levels being achieved during semaglutide use.[46] Further investigation into newer GLP-1s for the management of PCOS is indicated. However, using GLP-1 for comorbid FDA-approved indications, eg, OSA, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and heart failure, is recommended and justified, while monitoring improvement in metabolic and phenotypic parameters of PCOS is encouraged on an individual healthcare practitioner level.

Myoinositol 

Myoinositol is an over-the-counter food supplement that increases insulin sensitivity. Compared with placebo, insulin sensitivity in women with PCOS was improved without significantly affecting BMI. Data is limited, and its use has been mostly applied as fertility treatment of PCOS or when metformin is not tolerated, given that it has fewer gastrointestinal adverse effects.[47]

Bariatric surgery 

General population guidelines should be followed when informing about bariatric/metabolic surgery the women with PCOS.

Go to:
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnoses for PCOS include the following:

Use of androgenic steroids
Hypothyroidism
Late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Idiopathic/familial hirsutism
Ovarian malignancies
Go to:
Prognosis
The prevalence of hirsutism and acne decreases with age. Ovarian volume and follicle number also decline with age, with the age-related decrease in follicle number seemingly greater than ovarian volume.[35] While ovulation rates improve in women with PCOS as they age, successful pregnancies and live births decrease with age.[48] A 41% to 64.8% pregnancy success rate has been identified in females treated with letrozole [49][50], a cumulative live-birth rate of 31% (average 3 attempts) with intrauterine insemination [51], and a 29% live-birth rate for those treated with in-vitro fertilization (IVF).[52]

A population-based retrospective study conducted in a reproductive age cohort from Western Australia demonstrated a high-risk prognosis compared to the general population for more nonobstetric and noninjury-related hospital admissions (median, 5 versus 2; P < .001), a diagnosis of adult-onset diabetes (12.5% versus 3.8%), obesity (16% versus 3.7%), hypertensive disorder (3.8% versus 0.7%), ischemic heart disease (0.8% versus 0.2%), cerebrovascular disease (0.6% versus 0.2%), arterial and venous disease (0.5% versus 0.2% and 10.4% versus 5.6%, respectively), asthma (10.6% versus 4.5%), stress/anxiety (14% versus 5.9%), depression (9.8% versus 4.3%), licit/illicit drug-related admissions (8.8% versus 4.5%), self-harm (7.2% versus 2.9%), land transport accidents (5.2% versus 3.8%), and mortality (0.7% versus 0.4%) (all P < .001). Women with PCOS had a higher rate of admissions for menorrhagia (14.1% versus 3.6%), treatment of infertility (40.9% versus 4.6%), and miscarriage (11.1% versus 6.1%), and they were more likely to require in vitro fertilization (17.2% versus 2.0%).[53]

Despite the higher prevalence of risk factors noted above, a recent 32-year prospective study of PCOS women, aged 72 to 91 at the time of assessment, showed no evidence of an increase in all-cause mortality or cardiovascular death.[54]

Go to:
Complications
Infertility 

Endocrine Society Guidelines recommend screening for ovulatory status in all patients. Even a patient with eumenorrheic menstrual cycles may have anovulation, which can be measured by mid-luteal serum progesterone. Excluding other causes of infertility is also recommended. 

Obstetric Complications 

Women with PCOS should be counseled on the adverse impact of excess weight on clinical pregnancy, miscarriage, and live birth rates following infertility treatment.[30]

Endometrial Cancer 

Multiple studies have shown an increased risk of endometrial cancer in patients with PCOS. Numerous risk factors are shared between both pathologies. The Endocrine Society suggests against routine ultrasound endometrial thickness screening in asymptomatic patients. However, women should be counseled on reporting any unexpected or abnormal uterine bleeding.

Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases

Screening for obesity should be conducted in women with PCOS and adolescents by calculating BMI and waist circumference. Blood pressure measurement, diabetes screening, and lipid screening should be performed at diagnosis, and then follow-up levels should be checked at a frequency based on the results. Insulin resistance has been highly associated with PCOS. Around 33% to 66% of patients with PCOS have an abnormal degree of insulin resistance.

Endocrine Society guidelines recommend using an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), with fasting and 2-hour glucose after a 75 g OGTT, to screen for impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and type 2 diabetes. OGTT is preferred over HbA1c due to its decreased sensitivity in PCOS patients. Rescreening should be conducted every 3 to 4 years due to the higher frequency of risk factors in this population compared to the general population. Additionally, obese and overweight patients should be screened for symptoms of OSA and referred for sleep studies when this test is positive.

Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease 

Women with PCOS have 3 times the increased risk of MASLD, formerly known as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD); MASLD has been associated with androgen excess and low sex hormone-binding globulin. Routine measurement of LFT is not recommended unless the patient is overweight or obese, given the low sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of MASLD. In these patients, a change in management with newer antidiabetic medications like GLP-1 agonists can decrease the risk of the development of NAFLD.

Depression 

Evidence for an increased rate of depression symptoms was found for PCOS women compared to non-BMI-matched controls. Major depression, recurrent depression, and suicide attempts were also higher in PCOS women. Screening and identifying depression and anxiety disorders should be conducted, and appropriate treatment should also be given.

Go to:
Deterrence and Patient Education
PCOS is a diagnosis encompassing several symptoms and abnormalities that affect multiple parts of the body. PCOS is primarily a condition of increased male hormone activity, which can manifest through symptoms like male-pattern hair growth (hirsutism), scalp hair loss, and acne, or be detected through hormone blood tests. Additional symptoms may include irregular cycles and infertility. Diagnosis is made by thoroughly assessing symptoms, performing physical exams, conducting laboratory tests, and utilizing imaging techniques. No single test can confirm or exclude the diagnosis of PCOS.

PCOS can run in the family, where not just 1 gene, but the interaction of multiple genes might be responsible for this condition. PCOS is a common medical condition, and it is estimated that in certain ethnicities, it can be present in 1 in 4 women between the ages of 18 and 35 years old. An abnormality in the metabolism and storage of energy, known as insulin resistance, which is also the root cause of diabetes and obesity, has been implicated in causing and perpetuating this abnormal hormonal state. Therefore, the treatments suggested primarily involve at least a 5% weight loss, even in lean PCOS females, with a good response ultimately achieved. These treatments can include metformin and injectable weight loss or diabetes medications. The treatment plan is tailored around the individual health goals of each patient.

Around 70% of females with PCOS experience hirsutism; this can be managed with hormonal pills in addition to laser, electrolysis, shaving, and other forms of hair growth treatments offered in the community. Infertility is also common; around 70% of women with PCOS experience infertility. A 5% weight loss has been proven successful in returning fertility; if that intervention fails, then the addition of metformin and specialized infertility treatments through a reproductive and endocrine specialist is recommended.

Over their life span, we see that females with PCOS have a higher risk of developing infertility, high-risk pregnancy, miscarriage, diabetes, sleep apnea, obesity, endometrial cancer, depression, and heart disease; however, this has not been shown to affect their longevity. The day-to-day life and long-term burden of a chronic condition such as PCOS have psychological and economic implications. Engaging with peer support groups and healthcare teams, patients speaking up for themselves, and empowering others can go a long way while we all work together to build awareness and decrease the stigma related to PCOS.

Go to:
Pearls and Other Issues
Diagnosing PCOS in adolescents can be challenging. Many features of PCOS are common in normal puberty, for example, acne, menstrual irregularities, and hyperinsulinemia. Menstrual irregularities with anovulatory cycles occur due to the immaturity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis during the first 2 to 3 years after menarche. Persistent oligomenorrhea beyond this period predicts ongoing menstrual irregularities and a higher chance of underlying ovarian or adrenal dysfunction. Ultrasound is also not very helpful in adolescents because they commonly have large, multicystic ovaries. For OCPs started for presumptive diagnosis, close follow-up, patient education, and deferred confirmation of diagnosis are advised.

Testosterone, FSH, LH, and AMH levels cannot be reliably measured when on OCPs; clinicians should consider checking these levels after being off OCPs for at least 3 months. Acute onset or fast progression of hyperandrogenism in adulthood should prompt consideration of adrenal or ovarian tumors. Healthcare professionals should be aware that PCOS prevalence is broadly similar across different world regions but may be higher in Southeast Asian and Eastern Mediterranean regions. Eating disorders and disordered eating should be considered in PCOS, regardless of weight, especially in the context of weight management and lifestyle interventions. 

Go to:
Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes
Effective management of PCOS requires an interprofessional, patient-centered approach that leverages the expertise of various healthcare professionals. Physicians and advanced practitioners play a crucial role in diagnosis, initiating treatment, and coordinating care. Dermatologists address skin-related manifestations like hirsutism and acne, while reproductive endocrinologists and infertility specialists guide ovulatory dysfunction and fertility treatments. Obesity medicine practitioners and registered dietitians provide personalized weight management strategies, emphasizing lifestyle modifications that are essential for metabolic health. Psychiatrists and counselors support mental health concerns, including depression, anxiety, and eating disorders, which are prevalent among patients with PCOS. Pharmacists ensure the safe and effective use of medications such as hormonal contraceptives, insulin sensitizers, and anti-androgens, counseling patients on adherence and potential adverse effects.

Interprofessional communication and care coordination are vital to improving patient outcomes, safety, and overall team performance. Nurses serve as patient educators, reinforcing treatment plans and facilitating follow-ups to monitor progress. Medical estheticians and patient advocates help address cosmetic concerns and stigma related to PCOS symptoms, ultimately fostering patient confidence. Awareness and education efforts should extend beyond clinical settings to include fitness trainers and estheticians, who may be the first to identify symptoms such as hirsutism or unexplained weight gain. Shared decision-making tools empower patients to align treatment with their personal goals, whether related to symptom management, fertility, or metabolic risk reduction. Encouraging participation in support groups further enhances patient well-being, reducing stress and fostering a sense of community support. Healthcare teams can provide holistic, evidence-based care through this collaborative model, ensuring early recognition, timely intervention, and improved quality of life for individuals with PCOS.

Go to:
Review Questions
Access free multiple choice questions on this topic.
Click here for a simplified version.
Comment on this article.
Go to:
References
1.
Bozdag G, Mumusoglu S, Zengin D, Karabulut E, Yildiz BO. The prevalence and phenotypic features of polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod. 2016 Dec;31(12):2841-2855. [PubMed]
2.
Ding DC, Chen W, Wang JH, Lin SZ. Association between polycystic ovarian syndrome and endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancer: A population-based cohort study in Taiwan. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Sep;97(39):e12608. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
3.
Zhang C, Ma J, Wang W, Sun Y, Sun K. Lysyl oxidase blockade ameliorates anovulation in polycystic ovary syndrome. Hum Reprod. 2018 Nov 01;33(11):2096-2106. [PubMed]
4.
Norman RJ, Teede HJ. A new evidence-based guideline for assessment and management of polycystic ovary syndrome. Med J Aust. 2018 Sep 01;209(7):299-300. [PubMed]
5.
Escobar-Morreale HF. Polycystic ovary syndrome: definition, aetiology, diagnosis and treatment. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2018 May;14(5):270-284. [PubMed]
6.
Combs JC, Hill MJ, Decherney AH. Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome Genetics and Epigenetics. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2021 Mar 01;64(1):20-25. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
7.
Vink JM, Sadrzadeh S, Lambalk CB, Boomsma DI. Heritability of polycystic ovary syndrome in a Dutch twin-family study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;91(6):2100-4. [PubMed]
8.
Crespo RP, Bachega TASS, Mendonça BB, Gomes LG. An update of genetic basis of PCOS pathogenesis. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Jun;62(3):352-361. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
9.
Puttabyatappa M, Padmanabhan V. Ovarian and Extra-Ovarian Mediators in the Development of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. J Mol Endocrinol. 2018 Oct 16;61(4):R161-R184. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
10.
Xu J, Bao X, Peng Z, Wang L, Du L, Niu W, Sun Y. Comprehensive analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation across human polycystic ovary syndrome ovary granulosa cell. Oncotarget. 2016 May 10;7(19):27899-909. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
11.
Chen YH, Heneidi S, Lee JM, Layman LC, Stepp DW, Gamboa GM, Chen BS, Chazenbalk G, Azziz R. miRNA-93 inhibits GLUT4 and is overexpressed in adipose tissue of polycystic ovary syndrome patients and women with insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2013 Jul;62(7):2278-86. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
12.
Deswal R, Narwal V, Dang A, Pundir CS. The Prevalence of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Brief Systematic Review. J Hum Reprod Sci. 2020 Oct-Dec;13(4):261-271. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
13.
Sirmans SM, Pate KA. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of polycystic ovary syndrome. Clin Epidemiol. 2013 Dec 18;6:1-13. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
14.
Hallajzadeh J, Khoramdad M, Karamzad N, Almasi-Hashiani A, Janati A, Ayubi E, Pakzad R, Sullman MJM, Safiri S. Metabolic syndrome and its components among women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc Thorac Res. 2018;10(2):56-69. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
15.
Maya ET, Guure CB, Adanu RMK, Sarfo B, Ntumy M, Bonney EY, Lizneva D, Walker W, Azziz R. Why we need epidemiologic studies of polycystic ovary syndrome in Africa. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2018 Nov;143(2):251-254. [PubMed]
16.
van Keizerswaard J, Dietz de Loos ALP, Louwers YV, Laven JSE. Changes in individual polycystic ovary syndrome phenotypical characteristics over time: a long-term follow-up study. Fertil Steril. 2022 May;117(5):1059-1066. [PubMed]
17.
Helvaci N, Yildiz BO. Polycystic ovary syndrome as a metabolic disease. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2025 Apr;21(4):230-244. [PubMed]
18.
Ek I, Arner P, Rydén M, Holm C, Thörne A, Hoffstedt J, Wahrenberg H. A unique defect in the regulation of visceral fat cell lipolysis in the polycystic ovary syndrome as an early link to insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2002 Feb;51(2):484-92. [PubMed]
19.
Hayes E, Winston N, Stocco C. Molecular crosstalk between insulin-like growth factors and follicle-stimulating hormone in the regulation of granulosa cell function. Reprod Med Biol. 2024 Jan-Dec;23(1):e12575. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
20.
Wu X, Sallinen K, Zhou S, Su Y, Pöllänen P, Erkkola R. Androgen excess contributes to altered growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 axis in nonobese women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril. 2000 Apr;73(4):730-4. [PubMed]
21.
Cassar S, Misso ML, Hopkins WG, Shaw CS, Teede HJ, Stepto NK. Insulin resistance in polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp studies. Hum Reprod. 2016 Nov;31(11):2619-2631. [PubMed]
22.
Aboeldalyl S, James C, Seyam E, Ibrahim EM, Shawki HE, Amer S. The Role of Chronic Inflammation in Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome-A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 08;22(5) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
23.
Carvalho LML, Dos Reis FM, Candido AL, Nunes FFC, Ferreira CN, Gomes KB. Polycystic Ovary Syndrome as a systemic disease with multiple molecular pathways: a narrative review. Endocr Regul. 2018 Oct 01;52(4):208-221. [PubMed]
24.
Mansour A, Noori M, Hakemi MS, Haghgooyan Z, Mohajeri-Tehrani MR, Mirahmad M, Sajjadi-Jazi SM. Hyperandrogenism and anthropometric parameters in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. BMC Endocr Disord. 2024 Sep 27;24(1):201. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
25.
Marciniak A, Lejman-Larysz K, Nawrocka-Rutkowska J, Brodowska A, Songin D. [Polycystic ovary syndrome - current state of knowledge]. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2018 Jun 27;44(264):296-301. [PubMed]
26.
Sala Elpidio LN, de Alencar JB, Tsuneto PY, Alves HV, Trento Toretta M, It Taura SK, Laguila Visentainer JE, Sell AM. Killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors associated with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Reprod Immunol. 2018 Nov;130:1-6. [PubMed]
27.
Shorakae S, Ranasinha S, Abell S, Lambert G, Lambert E, de Courten B, Teede H. Inter-related effects of insulin resistance, hyperandrogenism, sympathetic dysfunction and chronic inflammation in PCOS. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2018 Nov;89(5):628-633. [PubMed]
28.
Albaghdadi AJH, Feeley CA, Kan FWK. Low-Dose Tacrolimus Prevents Dysregulated Peri-Conceptional Ovarian and Systemic Immune Cellular Homeostasis in Subjects with PCOS. Sci Rep. 2019 Apr 25;9(1):6528. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
29.
Wang F, Wang S, Zhang Z, Lin Q, Liu Y, Xiao Y, Xiao K, Wang Z. Defective insulin signaling and the protective effects of dimethyldiguanide during follicular development in the ovaries of polycystic ovary syndrome. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Dec;16(6):8164-8170. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
30.
Teede HJ, Tay CT, Laven JJE, Dokras A, Moran LJ, Piltonen TT, Costello MF, Boivin J, Redman LM, Boyle JA, Norman RJ, Mousa A, Joham AE., International PCOS Network. Recommendations from the 2023 international evidence-based guideline for the assessment and management of polycystic ovary syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol. 2023 Aug 02;189(2):G43-G64. [PubMed]
31.
Aswini R, Jayapalan S. Modified Ferriman-Gallwey Score in Hirsutism and its Association with Metabolic Syndrome. Int J Trichology. 2017 Jan-Mar;9(1):7-13. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
32.
Barber TM, Hanson P, Weickert MO, Franks S. Obesity and Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Implications for Pathogenesis and Novel Management Strategies. Clin Med Insights Reprod Health. 2019;13:1179558119874042. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
33.
Zhu S, Li Z, Hu C, Sun F, Wang C, Yuan H, Li Y. Imaging-Based Body Fat Distribution in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021;12:697223. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
34.
Azziz R, Carmina E, Dewailly D, Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Escobar-Morreale HF, Futterweit W, Janssen OE, Legro RS, Norman RJ, Taylor AE, Witchel SF., Task Force on the Phenotype of the Polycystic Ovary Syndrome of The Androgen Excess and PCOS Society. The Androgen Excess and PCOS Society criteria for the polycystic ovary syndrome: the complete task force report. Fertil Steril. 2009 Feb;91(2):456-88. [PubMed]
35.
Hsu MI. Changes in the PCOS phenotype with age. Steroids. 2013 Aug;78(8):761-6. [PubMed]
36.
Xie J, Burstein F, Garad R, Teede HJ, Boyle JA. Personalized Mobile Tool AskPCOS Delivering Evidence-Based Quality Information about Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Semin Reprod Med. 2018 Jan;36(1):66-72. [PubMed]
37.
Boyle JA, Xu R, Gilbert E, Kuczynska-Burggraf M, Tan B, Teede H, Vincent A, Gibson-Helm M. Ask PCOS: Identifying Need to Inform Evidence-Based App Development for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Semin Reprod Med. 2018 Jan;36(1):59-65. [PubMed]
38.
Misso ML, Tassone EC, Costello MF, Dokras A, Laven J, Moran LJ, Teede HJ., International PCOS Network. Large-Scale Evidence-Based Guideline Development Engaging the International PCOS Community. Semin Reprod Med. 2018 Jan;36(1):28-34. [PubMed]
39.
Crosignani PG, Colombo M, Vegetti W, Somigliana E, Gessati A, Ragni G. Overweight and obese anovulatory patients with polycystic ovaries: parallel improvements in anthropometric indices, ovarian physiology and fertility rate induced by diet. Hum Reprod. 2003 Sep;18(9):1928-32. [PubMed]
40.
Alpañés M, Álvarez-Blasco F, Fernández-Durán E, Luque-Ramírez M, Escobar-Morreale HF. Combined oral contraceptives plus spironolactone compared with metformin in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a one-year randomized clinical trial. Eur J Endocrinol. 2017 Nov;177(5):399-408. [PubMed]
41.
Ganie MA, Khurana ML, Nisar S, Shah PA, Shah ZA, Kulshrestha B, Gupta N, Zargar MA, Wani TA, Mudasir S, Mir FA, Taing S. Improved efficacy of low-dose spironolactone and metformin combination than either drug alone in the management of women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS): a six-month, open-label randomized study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Sep;98(9):3599-607. [PubMed]
42.
Glintborg D, Altinok ML, Mumm H, Hermann AP, Ravn P, Andersen M. Body composition is improved during 12 months' treatment with metformin alone or combined with oral contraceptives compared with treatment with oral contraceptives in polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;99(7):2584-91. [PubMed]
43.
Fraison E, Kostova E, Moran LJ, Bilal S, Ee CC, Venetis C, Costello MF. Metformin versus the combined oral contraceptive pill for hirsutism, acne, and menstrual pattern in polycystic ovary syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Aug 13;8(8):CD005552. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
44.
Niafar M, Pourafkari L, Porhomayon J, Nader N. A systematic review of GLP-1 agonists on the metabolic syndrome in women with polycystic ovaries. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2016 Mar;293(3):509-15. [PubMed]
45.
Han Y, Li Y, He B. GLP-1 receptor agonists versus metformin in PCOS: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online. 2019 Aug;39(2):332-342. [PubMed]
46.
Jensterle M, Ferjan S, Janez A. The maintenance of long-term weight loss after semaglutide withdrawal in obese women with PCOS treated with metformin: a 2-year observational study. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024;15:1366940. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
47.
Zeng L, Yang K. Effectiveness of myoinositol for polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocrine. 2018 Jan;59(1):30-38. [PubMed]
48.
Rausch ME, Legro RS, Barnhart HX, Schlaff WD, Carr BR, Diamond MP, Carson SA, Steinkampf MP, McGovern PG, Cataldo NA, Gosman GG, Nestler JE, Giudice LC, Leppert PC, Myers ER, Coutifaris C., Reproductive Medicine Network. Predictors of pregnancy in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3458-66. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
49.
Amer SA, Smith J, Mahran A, Fox P, Fakis A. Double-blind randomized controlled trial of letrozole versus clomiphene citrate in subfertile women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Hum Reprod. 2017 Aug 01;32(8):1631-1638. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
50.
Guo Z, Chen S, Chen Z, Hu P, Hao Y, Yu Q. Predictors of response to ovulation induction using letrozole in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. BMC Endocr Disord. 2023 Apr 25;23(1):90. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
51.
Gao Y, Jiang S, Chen L, Xi Q, Li W, Zhang S, Kuang Y. The pregnancy outcomes of infertile women with polycystic ovary syndrome undergoing intrauterine insemination with different attempts of previous ovulation induction. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022;13:922605. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
52.
Zhang X, Lian F, Liu D. Comparison of IVF/ICSI outcomes in advanced reproductive age patients with polycystic ovary syndrome and advanced reproductive age normal controls: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2023 Jun 14;23(1):440. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
53.
Hart R, Doherty DA. The potential implications of a PCOS diagnosis on a woman's long-term health using data linkage. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;100(3):911-9. [PubMed]
54.
Forslund M, Schmidt J, Brännström M, Landin-Wilhelmsen K, Dahlgren E. Morbidity and mortality in PCOS: A prospective follow-up up to a mean age above 80 years. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2022 Apr;271:195-203. [PubMed]
Disclosure: Anukrati Shukla declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

Disclosure: Lorena Rasquin declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

Disclosure: Catherine Anastasopoulou declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.